>> What if your highest
potential lies dormant within
your body?
Today we're talking
about the human riddle,
because truly how
can you know what
you're capable of if you don't
even know who and what you are?
The human species
is a mystery to us.
All of our modern science,
all of our advancements
have led us to the place
where we're still not agreeing
on what consciousness truly is.
In some ways, the
very instrument
we're using to answer that
question is consciousness
itself, meaning all the
tools and the technologies
that we use to answer
these questions
are technologies to peer
directly back into ourselves.
We are the mystery, all the
way down to the human body
and the language that
speaks to us with.
Yes, it does speak
to us, and it speaks
through our human behavior,
as well as our spirit, which
doesn't speak to us
directly through our body,
but really read between the
lines of all the behaviors
that we display through
our entire lives.
So let's begin with the body.
Why is there no manual?
Why is there no
guidebook to tell us
exactly what this language
of the body truly means?
And I believe it's
because we are not
a commodity or some product that
comes with some kind of owner's
manual.
We are a riddle.
We're meant to seek the
answer to our own existence.
Our body is always
speaking with us.
We have chemical
messengers that are always
going through our bloodstream.
We have electromagnetic impulses
going through our neurons.
We have postures that we hold.
We have behaviors and
movements that we display.
And all of this has very
valuable information for us,
but we typically
don't listen to it.
And we outsource
what this riddle is.
We outsource our questions about
this language to the doctors
and the scientists that
are out there today.
And one reason why I believe
that modern science is missing
a huge part of this puzzle
is because they are only
looking at the averages, the
numbers, the measurable spaces
of what the body is saying.
So if you go to the
doctor and they tell you
you have too high of cholesterol
or too high of blood pressure,
what does this really mean?
What is it saying?
Because what is normal for
me may not be normal for you,
and vise versa.
So to truly get at the
heart of the human riddle,
we need to go deeper
than just science.
And this is why today,
to answer this riddle,
we need to bring into question
who we are and why we're here.
So let's hear from Neil
Kramer in the "Initiation
to a Mystical Life."
>> The physical
world is a phantom,
a holographic representation
of something else.
Nothing can be
taken at face value.
Nothing can be taken as it is.
At its very core,
the essence of life
is mysterious,
mysterious by design.
The mystery is the teacher.
The mind can be
programmed by ourselves
to encounter the world more
accurately, more openly.
>> So Neil Kramer said that
the mystery is the teacher.
That's very beautiful,
because when
looking at the body and the
mysteries that it presents us,
just the outer form
is the beginning
or the tip of the iceberg.
If you were to open
up the body and take
a look at all the
different compartments, all
the different organs
and components,
all of the different cells,
all the different life forms
that are in there, the systems
that come together in harmony
so we can have this
experience, saying
this is me choosing to be here,
making these decisions right
now, is truly incredible.
And we also have trillions
of bacterial and fungal cells
inside of our body that
have DNA that is not human,
but they still influence us.
They still speak with us.
They add to the overall
language of the body.
So what do all of these
components in our body
have in common?
The language of chemistry.
Let's just take a look
at a chemical compound.
Chemical compounds are many
different elements bonded
together in a configuration.
And this configuration
is much like a key.
It fits into a receptor site
that our body is equipped with.
These receptor sites only allow
those chemical compounds in.
And when they do, they unlock
biological processes within us.
Now let's go even deeper
into chemical compounds,
because if you see all the
little elements that make up
that compound, every
one of them has
an atomic weight or
a resonant frequency,
meaning a pitch or a
tone that they hit.
But since there
are many elements,
these are many tones happening
at the same time, structurally
bound with one another.
This, to me, sounds like
music inside the body.
When a symphony or
a chord is struck,
the body changes its composition
and goes into different modes,
if you will.
But what makes the peaceful
balance of our body go haywire?
I believe that it's our modern
lifestyle and the stressors
that come with the type
of society and culture
we live in today.
These stressors are things
that our ancestors never
had to deal with.
These are stressors
like being in the car
in traffic late for work, or
the fear of losing our job,
or not having enough
money, the fear
of not being a good enough
parent or lover or human being.
These are simply perceptions.
They're not real threats.
But our body still
responds in that way.
So let's go deeper.
How do our perceptions
truly affect our body?
Let's see what the experts
in the film "E-motion"
have to say about this.
>> Now when we react to
conditions in our life,
there is an emotional component
that begins to create chemistry
in our bodies, because the body
is interpreting an emergency
situation.
>> Whenever you see something,
because the brain works
in pictures, there is a response
to that image of the sensory
impact.
If you hear a sound
that sounds dangerous,
your body, your brain will
create an emotional molecule
to get you to respond to that.
>> And so the mind does its
work very, very quickly.
And based on the data
that it is receiving,
it forms a truth about the
present memory or experience.
Based on that truth, it
comes up with a thought
that tells the self about
that memory or experience.
Based on that
thought, we generate
what we believe is the
appropriate emotion
to match that thought.
>> And as a result, our
heart rate increases,
our immune system suppresses,
we become more anxious
because we're not in our
fullest potential in the moment.
The core of every symptom,
stress, and disease
are emotions and memories,
traumatic perceptions
that are buried in
our subconscious mind.
>> So I want to remind you
what the host said there.
He said if we're not living
in our full potential,
then our immune
system is compromised,
meaning baseline health--
that standard that we would like
to have throughout our lives--
comes from living to
our full potential.
So why is this not the case
today in modern society?
I'm going to give you an
example of a modern stressor
and compare it to
an ancient one.
Let's imagine somebody almost
gets into a car accident.
They're fine, but they need to
pull over the car and process
what's just happened.
These tiny little adrenal
glands on top of our kidneys
start pumping out
a chemical compound
or a song called adrenaline.
And what this chemical
does inside the body
is it shuts down all the
biological processes that
do not need to be there
for us to fight or flight.
Now, this is a natural response.
This goes all the way back to
the gazelle on the plains being
chased by a cheetah.
So the response is
very unique, and it's
very specific to
having this fear
that we almost got injured.
But what happens
in the distinction
between the gazelle on the
plains and us in the car
is that the gazelle, assuming
that it gets to safety,
will go into a tremoring state.
It will begin shaking
its body until it's done,
and then it will
get up and move on.
Why does it do
this unique dance?
Sometimes we see people
tremoring and shaking
after a scary incident, but
it doesn't always happen.
So let's take a look deeply
inside the body at what's
happening when this gazelle
goes into that tremoring fit.
All of the adrenaline that
was pumped out into the body,
into the tissues,
begins to move itself.
Because of the shaking,
it starts the process,
move itself into the
bladder where it can
be eliminated from the body.
But if you're simply
sitting in your car
and you choose to call someone,
or drive that 15 minutes home
and talk to somebody and
process it intellectually,
this may be good.
But it's not processing
what's happening to the body.
The author Bradford Keeney wrote
a book called Shaking Medicine
because he noticed that
not only would animals
go into these tremoring fits to
help the health and the balance
of their body, but
he would also notice
that tribesmen and
shamans within tribes
would enter this tremoring
state so they would actually
enter their mind into an
altered state of consciousness.
In this state, they
were able to bring back
information for the
healing of their community.
So this is very peculiar.
This is an ancient
method of healing.
If we look at modern
exercises today,
such as total release
experience or the trauma release
experience, TRE, you'll notice
that involuntary shaking
is what happens when the
body starts to take over.
Some intelligence just
hijacks our decision making,
and the body starts to
tremor and shake on its own.
And what seems to come from
this is a healing response.
But then ask yourself, why do we
need specialized practices when
this is what our ancient
ancestors in the animal kingdom
does naturally?
And I believe it's
because we come now
from a very sedentary society.
At no other time
in history have we
ever practiced the posture
of sitting nearly this much.
We do not move like
our ancestors did--
15 hours for food, 10,
11 hours squatting.
We do not move through lush,
dense environments anymore.
Our environment is very
predictable, very flat,
and we barely move within it.
This has massive consequences
to our body and our health.
Dr. Steven Mann said, "today's
children are the least active
ever and face a ticking
time bomb of health issues
that puts them at serious
risk of having shorter
lives than their parents."
That's an incredible statement.
He goes on to say that
movement has been stripped out
of modern living, meaning
Generation Inactive, as he
calls our youth,
are driven to school
and fed a staple diet
of sofa play and screen
time while being starved
of outdoor activities.
Now that I've mentioned some
of the issues and the problems
that we face in
our modern society,
I want to tell you that the
solutions could not be simpler.
My favorite practice
is an integration
of body, mind, and time.
When we integrate
the body and the mind
together over a period of time,
this is truly no different
than all the movement modalities
in the ancient practices as
well as meditation.
And they all still exist today,
and they're just as powerful.
So let's start cracking into
exactly how much the body can
influence our
chemical composition
and our true potential.
A social psychologist
named Amy Cuddy
did a TED Talk that
revolutionized the way we look
at how we hold our posture.
If you see behind
her, there's a runner
that must have won this
race because his arms are up
above his head in victory pose.
We're familiar with this pose.
We see children do it when
they feel accomplished,
when they did something
that they're proud of.
We also see people
stretching with this posture
to come out of
their seated posture
that we adopt so
often in this society.
But what she found
was truly remarkable,
that just two minutes of putting
your arms above your head
changes your entire
chemical composition.
Testosterone, the confidence
boosting hormone, raises.
Cortisol, the stress
hormone, lowers.
And testosterone
allows for people
to feel more confident
in their allotted space,
feeling like they can
speak up and truly
be who they need to
be in that moment.
This is incredible, that
two minutes of a posture
can cause this kind of a change
in our body and in our minds.
Now let's take it deeper.
You may have heard of Botox,
this injectable toxin that
plumps up the skin and
smooths out wrinkles.
But you may not
have heard that it's
being called the
other anti anxiety,
or the other antidepressant.
And it's being called this
for a very unique reason,
because this toxin
has been known
to paralyze key facial muscles.
So the people who get Botox
cannot show the expressions
or the emotions of happiness,
joy, depression, or anxiety.
If we're not able to
use these muscles,
then the body does not
respond by changing
the chemical
composition, putting you
in those moods and
those emotions,
meaning our body and the
way we use it can literally
make you happier.
But what does this say about
fulfillment, our greater life's
purpose?
What's the pose or
the posture that
allows us to feel fulfilled?
Well, I don't believe that it
actually comes from our body.
I believe it comes
from our spirit.
I believe that spirit is much
like the narrator of the story
of our lives, the one who has
a higher perspective on who we
are, what direction
we're heading,
and why we should end
up where we're going.
But spirit also has
a good understanding
of how our inner world
affects the world around us.
So now let's take a
look at a show called
"Missing Links" with Gregg
Braden, a Gaia special,
as he dives in to
tackle that question.
>> In the original texts, the
Aramaic translates "to ask
without hidden motive and be
surrounded by your answer,
be enveloped by what you desire.
And those are the key words--
be.
If you are being
surrounded by your answer,
if you are being enveloped
by what you desire,
it means that you are having
the emotional experience
as if those things
are already present.
And this is a very,
very powerful concept.
There is a huge
difference between working
toward an outcome and
beginning as if that outcome is
already present.
Think about this.
Think about it for
your own healing.
your own relationships.
Think about it for the
abundance in your life.
If you are asking for
them to be present,
it means they are
not present now.
If you are giving thanks
for what already exists,
you are claiming that it
is present in this moment.
You are changing the
biology of your body.
You're changing the
chemistry of your body
as it interacts with
your physical environment
so that that reality
may be present.
Remember, the field
is a mirror for what
we claim to be true within.
>> So what Gregg showed us
there in that clip is that deep
within us, our inner nature
knows how to be the change we
wish to see in the world.
And that this ancient
scripture in the Old Testament
mirrors what Gandhi said--
be the change you wish
to see in the world.
Don't simply wish for
it, be it, live it.
And in this way, as
we've seen before,
the chemical composition and
everything about the body
starts to reflect what we would
like to see in the outer world.
And it literally starts
to become just that.
But why don't we use this gift?
Why have we lost
this gift to time?
Well, if you look at our
modern society today,
we are in the business
of pushing nature out
of our habitats.
Any nature, such as plants or
animals, even the people that
live within these
groups, are domesticated,
living on a societal
form of terms
rather than the wild
teacher of nature.
So what are we losing by
living in this modern society
in the way that we do?
Are we experiencing
a mass forgetting,
a collective amnesia?
Because truthfully, the
body is speaking to us.
Spirit is speaking to us.
And they have ancient, very
important messages for us.
But if we've forgotten
how to use it,
then we're not able to tap
back into the messages that
have been left by
all of our ancestors
and all of these scriptures.
So I've been
mentioning a lot today
about how modern lifestyle
stressors are unlike what
our ancestors had to deal with.
And this is true, but what
am I really saying here?
Should we throw away
all of our advancements,
try and return to
hunter-gatherer times,
live purely of nature,
go spear fishing,
throw away all of
our technology?
Of course not.
This would be silly.
What we really need to do
is honor all the advances
that we've made as a species.
But we really need to respect
where we've come from.
And let me put this to you
in a very scientific way.
Author Chris Kresser,
a functional medicine
practitioner,
wrote a book called
"An Unconventional Medicine."
And in that book, he said that
only roughly 5% of our DNA
has updated since
hunter-gatherer times.
What does this mean?
This means that we are
holistic creatures.
We need to respect
our forward progress,
but we also need to respect
where we've come from
and why we are here in
the way that we are today.
And if we do this,
we'll truly understand
how to listen to the body,
listen to what it's saying,
and listen for that thing
called spirit speaking to us
in between the lines of all
the greater things that we
do in our lives.
Now I'll leave you
with a challenge
so you can actually employ
what I'm talking about
and feel the changes
in your life.
So the first one
was from Amy Cuddy.
Lifting the arms up above
the head for two minutes.
Do this in front of the mirror.
Take a look at your
posture as you do it.
See if there's any asymmetries.
Try and even them out.
Try and breathe
naturally, and find a way
to enjoy this next
two minutes which
might get a little intense.
And as you do that, as
it comes to a close,
softly bring your arms down,
regulate your breathing,
close your eyes, and just
feel what kind of difference
that made.
While you're in
front of the mirror,
you might want to try smiling
for a couple of minutes.
You might even notice that
smiling inauthentically
produces much different
change than smiling
very authentically.
So try to give your
most authentic smile
for two minutes.
And then, again, stop,
meditate on how it actually
changed the way you feel.
And the best body, mind, time
integration tool is meditation.
So I would advise you to
meditate every day because this
is one of the most important
body, mind, and time
integration tools that we have.
It's the best way to
answer that question--
who are we?
What is the human riddle?
And if you do this every single
day until I see you next,
you will have linked your
body and mind that much more,
which is going to be very
important as we set off
on this journey to discover
our deepest human potential.
Thank you so much for joining
me, and I'll see you next time.